AUTH48 review of RFC Editor's Proposed Changes (#879)
mlswg/mls-protocol: draft-ietf-mls-protocol.md

~~~
{: #prepublish-flow title="Clients A, B, and C publish KeyPackages to the directory"}

{{create-flow}} shows how these pre-published KeyPackages are used to create a group.
When client A wants to establish a group with clients B and C, it first initializes a
group state containing only itself and downloads KeyPackages for B and C. For
each member, A generates an Add and Commit message to add that member and then

> broadcasts them to the group. Client A also generates a Welcome message and sends it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
broadcasts it to the group. Client A also generates a Welcome message and sends it
```

"it" is referring to the Commit message with Add proposal that A generates.

In general, I find it awkward talking about Add and Commit messages. This is a single message (the Commit) with an enclosed Add proposal.

Reviewer 2: Agreed, I think this terminology got carried over from the times when we had actual Add messages

Author: Not necessarily!  You could send an Add Proposal alongside a Commit.  At this stage, I think it is a little clearer to address them separately, with inlining as an optimization discussed later.  Reworded to be a little more explicit, though:

> A generates an Add message and a Commit message to add that member and then broadcasts the two messages to the group

Reviewer: Huh?
We are describing the canonical flow here, not prescribing normative behavior. Even if we were, A sends a Commit message which contains or references A's Add proposal. The important thing for the clarity of this sentence is the Commit message, and in 99% of cases, A will never **separately** send an Add proposal. The proposed rewording misleads the reader otherwise.

{: #create-flow title="Client A creates a group with clients B and C"}

Subsequent additions of group members proceed in the same way.  Any
member of the group can download a KeyPackage for a new client,

> broadcast Add and Commit messages that the current group will use to update

Reviewer: Again, "Add and Commit messages" is awkward

|              |              |              |              |
~~~
{: #update-flow title="Client B proposes to update its key, and client A commits the
proposal.  As a result, the keys for both B and A updated, so the group has

> post-compromise security with respect to both of them."}

Reviewer 3: "As a result" was supposed to be moved into the body of the text I believe

Author: This got reworded as it moved.

## Ratchet Tree Terminology

Trees consist of _nodes_. A node is a
_leaf_ if it has no children; otherwise, it is a _parent_.
All parents in our trees have precisely
two children, a _left_ child and a _right_ child. A node is the _root_
of a tree if it has no parent, and _intermediate_ if it has both
children and a parent. The _descendants_ of a node are that node's
children, and the descendants of its children.  We say a tree
_contains_ a node if that node is a descendant of the root of the tree,
or if the node itself is the root of the tree. Nodes are _siblings_ if they share the same parent.

A _subtree_ of a tree is the tree given by any node (the _head_ of the
subtree) and its descendants. The _size_ of a tree or subtree is the
number of leaf nodes it contains.  For a given parent node, its _left

> subtree_ is the subtree with its left child as head and the its

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
subtree_ is the subtree with its left child as head and its
```

### Ratchet Tree Nodes

Each leaf node in a ratchet tree is given an _index_ (or _leaf index_), starting

> at 0 from the left to 2<sup>d - 1</sup> at the right (for a tree with 2<sup>d</sup> leaves). A tree

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
at 0 from the left to 2<sup>d</sup>-1 at the right (for a tree with 2<sup>d</sup> leaves). A tree
```

Where EncryptContext is specified as:

~~~ tls-presentation
struct {
  opaque label<V>;
  opaque context<V>;
} EncryptContext;
~~~

And its fields are set to:

~~~
label = "MLS 1.0 " + Label;
context = Context;
~~~

> Here, the functions `SealBase` and `OpenBase` are defined {{Section 6.1 of

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Here, the functions `SealBase` and `OpenBase` are defined in {{Section 6.1 of
```

For a KeyPackageRef, the `value` input is the encoded KeyPackage, and the
ciphersuite specified in the KeyPackage determines the KDF used.  For a
ProposalRef, the `value` input is the AuthenticatedContent carrying the
Proposal.  In the latter two cases, the KDF is determined by the group's
ciphersuite.

## Credentials

Each member of a group presents a credential that provides one or more
identities for the member and associates them with the member's signing key.
The identities and signing key are verified by the Authentication Service in use
for a group.

> It is up to the application to decide which identifier(s) to use at

Reviewer: I think "identifier or identifiers" is clearer.

Author: Reduced to "identifiers", seems cleaner.

# Key Packages

In order to facilitate the asynchronous addition of clients to a

> group, clients can pre-publish KeyPackage objects that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
group, clients pre-publish KeyPackage objects that
```
The "in order to facilitate" already makes the "can" redundant here.

Author: Disagree.  Omitting the "can" implies that pre-publication is mandatory, which it isn't really.  In a more real-time setting, you could provide the KeyPackage at join time, to prompt the Add+Commit.  If you want to stretch things, you say that this is still "pre" in the sense that it's before the Add.  But that seems like a stretch.

Reviewer: I think the earlier phrase "In order to facilitate ..." makes it clear this is optional, but no biggie here.

The creator of a group is responsible for setting the group ID, ciphersuite, and
initial extensions for the group.  If the creator intends to add other members
at the time of creation, then it SHOULD fetch KeyPackages for the members to be
added, and select a ciphersuite and extensions according to the capabilities of
the members.  To protect against downgrade attacks, the creator MUST use the
`capabilities` information in these KeyPackages to verify that the chosen
version and ciphersuite is the best option supported by all members.

Group IDs SHOULD be constructed in such a way that there is an overwhelmingly low
probability of honest group creators generating the same group ID, even without
assistance from the Delivery Service. This can be done, for example, by making the group ID a
freshly generated random value of size `KDF.Nh`. The Delivery Service MAY
attempt to ensure that group IDs are globally unique by rejecting the creation
of new groups with a previously used ID.

> To initialize a group, the creator of the group <bcp14>MUST</bcp14> take the

Reviewer 3: Why is this the only place where `<bcp14>` happened?

Author: I think I added it before I realized that it could get added automatically.  In any case, removed.

### External Proposals

Proposals can be constructed and sent to the group by a party
that is outside the group in two cases. One case, indicated by the `external` SenderType
is useful, for example, if an automated service might propose

> removing a member of a group who has been inactive for a long time, or propose adding

Reviewer: this is still a mouthful of a sentence and reads worse than the original IMO. 

```suggestion
could be used by an automated service, for example, to remove a member
of a group who has been inactive for a long time, or to propose adding
```

its right subtree.  (This is the same ordering as specified for the array-based
trees outlined in {{array-based-trees}}.)

If the tree has 2<sup>d</sup> leaves, then it has 2<sup>d+1</sup> - 1 nodes.  The
`ratchet_tree` vector logically has this number of entries, but the sender
MUST NOT include blank nodes after the last non-blank node.  The receiver MUST
check that the last node in `ratchet_tree` is non-blank, and extend it to the
right until it has a length of the form 2<sup>d+1</sup> - 1, adding the minimum number
of blank values possible.  (Obviously, this may be done "virtually", by
synthesizing blank nodes when required, as opposed to actually changing the
structure in memory.)

The leaves of the tree are stored in even-numbered entries in the array (the
leaf with index `L` in array position `2*L`). The root node of the tree is at

> position 2<sup>d - 1</sup> of the array. Intermediate parent nodes can be identified by

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
position 2<sup>d</sup>-1 of the array. Intermediate parent nodes can be identified by
```

Author: Really good catch, thanks.

## Credential Extensibility

In order to ensure that MLS provides meaningful authentication, it is important
that each member is able to authenticate some identity information for each
other member.  Identity information is encoded in Credentials, so this property
is provided by ensuring that members use compatible credential types.

> The only types of credential that may be used in a group are those that all
> members of the group support, as specified by the `capabilities` field of each
> LeafNode in the ratchet tree. An application can introduce new credential types

Reviewer: This is an unnecessary imposition and makes it impossible to add support for new credential types for some members of a group, and makes KeyPackage more complicated. If a specific credential type is required by all the members of the group, it should be included in `required_capabilities`.  The specific use case of unknown credentials was discussed in various interim meetings and was a major motivator for moving the signature out of the credential and into the LeafNode.

```suggestion
If a specific credential type is included in the `required_capabilities` extension
in the GroupContext, then all members of the group MUST support that credential
type, as specified by the `capabilities` field of each LeafNode in the ratchet tree.
Credential types that are unknown to a member and not included the
`required_capabilities` extension are ignored by the member. This allows a subset
of members to introduce additional functionality without requiring universal
support for a new credential type. An application can introduce new credential types
```

Reviewer 2: I remember the discussions a bit differently, namely that we included the signature key in the leaf node so that we can have easier extensibility for credentials, but *not* that we can now have arbitrary combinations of credentials. I'm worried that this weakens authentication guarantees when clients can only verify a signature but no longer correlate it to an identity. It's also not clear to me why we can't do what we do with other extensions: first make sure every client in the group supports it as advertized in its capabilities and *only then* make it a required capability before using it.

Reviewer 4: The part I'm worried about here is `Credential types that are unknown to a member and not included the
required_capabilities extension are ignored by the member.` This seems to conflict with the fact that every credential ` MUST be validated with the AS`, since a member can't verify a credential it doesn't support? Note that required capabilities are optional, so credentials must be verified even without them.

Reviewer 5: I second @raphaelrobert and @mulmarta. Allowing credentials that are not supported by a subset of group members and which they can thus only ignore seems like a very bad idea from an authentication standpoint. @rohan-wire can you maybe elaborate what kind of use-case you had in mind? Because I'm having trouble thinking of one. It would have to be a situation, where different applications are interoperating and where clients are okay with group members that they cannot authenticate at all. For such a group, one might was well use basic credentials.

Reviewer: MLS currently supports `basic` and `x509`. It does not require `x509`. So, the "default" case is that groups support `basic` which has no authentication (and is similar to what the industry does now for DoubleRatchet protocols). This can be mitigated with key transparency or manual verification, but is mostly just swept under the rug.

Now imagine a vendor/provider introduces support for x509 credentials tomorrow. Do clients have to wait until they are in a group when 100% of the members support this credential type before they include their credentials? 
- What harm does it cause to clients which only support `basic`? I cannot see any. They had no authentication before. They still have no authentication?
- Does it create an opportunity for bid-down?  No. because credential capabilities are signed in KeyPackages.
- Can clients who *do* support `x509` do something useful with those credentials? Yes. the subset of clients which support x509 can indicate to the end user which clients in the roster have been validated and can even put more prominent indications when everyone is using the credentials or when suddenly everyone is not.
- Do we lose the ability to require a specific credential type? No. a client can set `required_capabilities`.

Does that help?

Reviewer 2: You provide an example in which you claim there's no downside to your proposed changes. Here's a counter-example: Suppose a group is to use X.509 and X.509 only. With the proposed changes, a subset of the clients could start using BasicCredentials and the remainder of the clients would have to comply with that, since BasicCredentials would simply be an unknown credential to them.
We would need better reasoning about the relaxation, however I'm doubtful that it's a good idea to do such a potentially impactful change during AUTH48, without the possibility to fully consider all consequences.

Reviewer: Why wouldn't those clients just use `required_capabilities` if they only want to use X.509?
I also find it a bit preposterous the idea that an implementation would not understand what `basic` is, as opposed to administratively refusing to use it.

I am sympathetic about the AUTH48 comment, but that would indicate this is better fixed as an errata than an extension.

Author: Without getting into the details of the discussion here -- this is a significant change for this late.  I would have been skeptical but open earlier in the process; at this point, it's clearly too big.  And it doesn't seem like anyone is in support besides @rohan-wire.  I'm going to decline to include this change unless the chairs tell me otherwise.

FWIW, I would also argue that this change should not be accepted as an erratum.  It is not an error in the spec, it is a deliberate decision by the working group.

That said, you could definitely write a small, no-content `allow_unknown_credentials` GroupContext extension that just says, "In this group, it's OK to use credentials that not everyone supports".  Then you just switch on the presence of that extension to turn off the credential support checking.  You still have an everyone-has-to-upgrade problem, but only with regard to that extension, not every credential type.

For the KeyPackage and GroupInfo extensions, the `extension_data` for GREASE
extensions MAY have any contents selected by the sender, since they will be
ignored by a correctly implemented receiver.  For example, a sender might
populate these extensions with a randomly sized amount of random data.

Note that any GREASE values added to `LeafNode.extensions` need to be reflected
in `LeafNode.capabilities.extensions`, since the LeafNode validation process
described in {{leaf-node-validation}} requires that these two fields be
consistent.

GREASE values MUST NOT be sent in the following fields, because an unsupported
value in one these fields (including a GREASE value) will cause the enclosing
message to be rejected:

* `Proposal.proposal_type`

> * `Credential.credential_type`

Reviewer: suggest removing credential_type from the list if my previous change is accepted.

```suggestion
```

re-derived. Forward secrecy *within* an epoch is provided by deleting message
encryption keys once they've been used to encrypt or decrypt a message.
Note that group secrets and message encryption keys are shared by the

> group.  There is  thus a risk to forward secrecy as long as any

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
group.  There is thus a risk to forward secrecy as long as any
```

data origin authentication properties afforded by signatures within the group
are degraded.

Uniqueness of keys in leaf nodes is assured by explicitly checking each leaf node

> being added to the tree by in Add proposal, in an Update proposals, or in the `path` field of a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
being added to the tree by in Add proposals, in Update proposals, or in the `path` field of a
```

Author: Reworded to:

> ... each leaf node as it is added to the tree, whether in an Add proposal, in an Update proposal, or in the `path` field of a Commit.

That way everything is singular.  Also got rid of "by in".

> Uniqueness of keys in leaf nodes is assured by explicitly checking each leaf node
> being added to the tree by in Add proposal, in an Update proposals, or in the `path` field of a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Uniqueness of keys in leaf nodes is assured by explicitly checking each leaf node
being added to the tree in any Add proposals, in any Update proposals, or in the `path` field of a
```

and assignments are made via the Specification Required policy {{!RFC8126}}. See
{{de}} for additional information about the MLS Designated Experts (DEs).

> RFC EDITOR: Please replace 9420 throughout with the RFC number assigned to
> this document

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

| Label | Recommended | Reference |
|:------|:------------|:----------|
| (N/A) | (N/A)       | (N/A)     |
{: title="MLS Exporter Labels Registry" }

## MLS Designated Expert Pool {#de}

Specification Required {{RFC8126}} registry requests are registered

> after a three-week review period on the MLS DEs' mailing list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
after a three-week review period on the MLS Designated Expert (DE) mailing list
```
